not just physics courses) and it is time to get on with the actual material for this course.
Mathematics
Physics, as was noted in the preface, requires a solid knowledge of all mathematics through calculus.
Thats right, the whole nine yards: number theory, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, vectors, differ-
ential calculus, integral calculus, even a smattering of differential equations. Somebody may have24 Preliminaries
told you that you can go ahead and take physics having gotten Cs in introductory calculus, perhaps
in a remedial course that you took because you had such a hard time with precalc or because you
failed straight up calculus when you took it.
They lied.
Sorry to be blunt, but thats the simple truth. Heres a list of a few of the kinds of things youll
have to be able to do during the next two semesters of physics. Dont worry just yet about what
they mean  that is part of what you will learn along the way. The question is, can you (perhaps
with a short review of things youve learned and knew at one time but have not forgotten) evaluate
these mathematical expressions or solve for the algebraic unknowns? You dont necessarily have to
be able to do all of these things right this instant, but you should at the very least recognize most
of them and be able to do them with just a very short review:
0 What are the two values of 04 that solve:
R 1
2 _ _= 7
oz +L04+LC 0.
o What is: T
PO l3 /
=4 ?
Q(r) R 7r 0 1" dr
0 What is:
dcos(wt+6)?
dt '
y
 
What are the 17 and y components of a vector of length A that makes an angle of 0 with the
positive (I? axis (proceeding, as usual, counterclockwise for positive 0)?
What is the sum of the two vectors If = Aw: + Ayy and B = B3537 + Byg?
What is the inner/ dot product of the two vectors [f = Aw: + Ayg and g = ng + Byg?
What is the cross product of the two vectors 7" = mud: and 17" = Fyy (magnitude and direction)?
If all of these items are unfamiliar  you dont remember the quadratic formula (needed to solve
the rst one), cant integrate 1:"d1: (needed to solve the second one), dont recall how to differentiate
a sine or cosine function, dont recall your basic trigonometry so that you cant nd the components
of a vector from its length and angle or vice versa, and dont recall what the dot or cross product
of two vectors are, then you are going to have to add to the burden of learning physics per se the
burden of learning, or re-learning, all of the basic mathematics that would have permitted you to
answer these questions easily.
Here are the answers, see if this jogs your memory:Preliminaries 25
0 Here are the two roots, found with the quadratic formula:
six/(aka R i
2
 
 
ai=_____ 1_35
.
Po T ,3 I Po 74 T por4
=_4 =4'_ =
om Rrw Rw40 R
O
W = wsi11(wt + 6)
w
0
A1: = Acos(0) A?! = Asin(9)
K+=cn+3ae+og+3g
X=mm+mm
Fx=mxy=nJMxm=nJ
My strong advice to you, if you are now feeling the cold icy grip of panic because in fact you
are signed up for physics using this book and you couldnt answer any of these questions and dont
even recognize the answers once you see them, is to seek out the course instructor and review your
math skills with him or her to see if, in fact, it is advisable for you to take physics at this time or
rather should wait and strengthen your math skills rst. You can, and will, learn a lot of math while
taking physics and that is actually part of the point of taking it! If you are too weak going into it,
though, it will cost you some misery and hard work and some of the grade you might have gotten
with better preparation ahead of time.
So, what if you could do at least some of these short problems and can remember once learn-
ing/ knowing the tools, like the Quadratic Formula, that you were supposed to use to solve them?
Suppose you are pretty sure that  given a chance and resource to help you out  you can do some
review and theyll all be fresh once again in time to keep up with the physics and still do well in
the course? What if you have no choice but to take physics now, and are just going to have to do
your best and relearn the math as required along the way? What if you did in fact understand math
pretty well once upon a time and are sure it wont be much of an obstacle, but you really would like
a review, a summary, a listing of the things you need to know someplace handy so you can instantly
look them up as you struggle with the problems that uses the math it contains? What if you are
(or were) really good at math, but want to be able to look at derivations or reread explanations to
bring stuff you learned right back to your ngertips once again?
Hmmm, that set of questions spans the set of student math abilities from the near-tyro to the
near-expert. In my experience, everybody but the most mathematically gifted students can probably
benet from having a math review handy while taking this course. For all of you, then, I provide
the following free book online:
Mathematics for Introductory Physics
It is located here:
http: / / www.phy.duke.edu / ~rgb / Class / math_for_intro_physics.php26 Preliminaries
It is a work in progress, and is quite possibly still somewhat incomplete, but it should help you
with a lot of what you are missing or need to review, and if you let me know what you are missing
that you didnt nd there, I can work to add it!
I would strongly advise all students of introductory physics (any semester) to visit this site right
now and bookmark it or download the PDF, and to visit the site from time to time to see if Ive
posted an update. It is on my back burner, so to speak, until I nish the actual physics texts
themselves that Im working on, but I will still add things to them as motivated by my own needs
teaching courses using this series of books.
Summary
Thats enough preliminary stuff. At this point, if youve read all of this week s material and vowed
to adopt the method of three passes in all of your homework efforts, if youve bookmarked the math
help or downloaded it to your personal ebook viewer or computer, if youve realized that your brain
is actually something that you can help and enhance in various ways as you try to learn things, then
my purpose is well-served and you are as well-prepared as you can be to tackle physics.