46 Week 1: newton's Laws
1.4: newton's Laws
The following are newton's Laws as you will need to know them to both solve problems and answer
conceptual questions in this course. Note well that they are framed in terms of the spatial coordinates
dened in the previous section plus mass and time.
a) Law of Inertia: Objects at rest or in uniform motion (at a constant velocity) in an inertial
reference frame remain so unless acted upon by an unbalanced (net, total) force. We can write
this algebraically as:
diz
17" = Zi = 0 = m6? = ma => 17' = constant vector (19)
i
b) Law of Dynamics: The total force applied to an object is directly proportional to its accel-
eration in an inertial reference frame. The constant of proportionality is called the mass of
the object. We write this algebraically as:
d(m17') _ dfi
dt _ E (20)

=za=ma=
i
where we introduce the momentum of a particle, if = m5, in the last way of writing it.
c) Law of Reaction: If object A exerts a force 17'" AB on object B along a line connecting the
two objects, then object B exerts an equal and opposite reaction force of F B A = FAB on
object A. We write this algebraically as:
o o
Fij = sz' (21)
(or) 21317 = 0 (22)
where i and j are arbitrary particle labels. The latter form will be useful to us later; it means
that the sum of all internal forces between particles in any closed system of particles cancelsl.
Note that these laws are not all independent as mathematics goes. The rst law is a clear and
direct consequence of the second. The third is not  it is an independent statement. The rst law
historically, however, had an important purpose. It rejected the dynamics of Aristotle, introducing
the new idea of intertia where an object in motion continues in that motion unless acted upon by
some external agency. This is directly opposed to the Aristotelian view that things only moved when
acted on by an external agency and that they naturally came to rest when that agency was removed.
The second law is our basic dynamical principle. It tells one how to go from a problem description
(in words) plus a knowledge of the force laws of nature to an equation of motion (typically a
statement of newton's second law). The equation of motion, generally solved for the acceleration,
becomes a kinematical equation from which we can develop a full knowledge of the solution using
mathematics guided by our experience and physical intuition.
The third law leads (as we shall see) to the surprising result that systems of particles behave
collectively like a particle! This is indeed fortunate! We know that something like a baseball is really
made up of a lot of teensy particles itself, and yet it obeys newton's Second law as if it is a particle.
We will use the third law to derive this and the closely related Law of Conservation of Momentum
in a later week of the course.
An inertial reference frame is a coordinate system (or frame) that is either at rest or moving
at a constant speed, a non-accelerating frame of reference. For example, the ground, or lab frame,
is a coordinate system at rest relative to the approximately non-accelerating ground or lab and
is considered to be an inertial frame to a good approximation. A (coordinate system inside a) carWeek 1: newton's Laws 47
travelling at a constant speed relative to the ground, a spaceship coasting in a region free from elds, a
railroad car rolling on straight tracks at constant speed are also inertial frames. A (coordinate system
inside a) car that is accelerating (say by going around a curve), a spaceship that is accelerating, a
freight car that is speeding up or slowing down  these are all examples of non-inertial frames. All
of newton's laws suppose an inertial reference frame (yes, the third law too) and are generally false
for accelerations evaluated in an accelerating frame as we will prove and discuss next week.
in
In the meantime, please be sure to learn the statements of the laws including the condition
an inertial reference frame, in spite of the fact that you dont yet really understand what this means
and why we include it. Eventually, it will be the other important meaning and use of newton's First
Law  it is the law that denes an inertial reference frame as any frame where an object remains in
a state of uniform motion if no forces act on it!
Youll be glad that you did.
1 .5: Forces
Classical dynamics at this level, in a nutshell, is very simple. Find the total force on an object.
Use newton's second law to obtain its acceleration (as a differential equation of motion). Solve the
equation of motion by direct integration or otherwise for the position and velocity.
Thats it!
Well, except for answering those pesky questions that we typically ask in a physics problem, but
well get to that later. For the moment, the next most important problem is: how do we evaluate
the total force?
To answer it, we need a knowledge of the forces at our disposal, the force laws and rules that
we are likely to encounter in our everyday experience of the world. Some of these forces are funda-
mental forces  elementary forces that we call laws of nature because the forces themselves arent
caused by some other force, they are themselves the actual causes of dynamical action in the visible
Universe. Other force laws arent quite so fundamental  they are more like approximate rules
and arent exactly correct. They are also usually derivable from (or at least understandable from)
the elementary natural laws, although it may be quite a lot of work to do so.
We quickly review the forces we will be working with in the rst part of the course, both the
forces of nature and the force rules that apply to our everyday existence in approximate form.
1.5.1: The Forces of Nature
At this point in your life, you almost certainly know that all normal matter of your everyday
experience is made up of atoms. Most of you also know that an atom itself is made up of a positively
charged atomic nucleus that is very tiny indeed surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons
that are much lighter. Atoms in turn bond together to make molecules, atoms or molecules in turn
bind together (or not) to form gases, liquids, solids  things, including those macroscopic things
that we are so far treating as particles.
The actual elementary particles from which they are made are much tinier than atoms. It is worth
providing a greatly simplied table of the stuff from which normal atoms (and hence molecules,
and hence we ourselves) are made:
In this table, up and down quarks and electrons are so-called elementary particles  things that
are not made up of something else but are fundamental components of nature. Quarks bond together
three at a time to form nucleons  a proton is made up of up-up-down quarks and has a charge
of +e, where e is the elementary electric charge. A neutron is made up of up-down-down and has48 Week 1: newton's Laws








Particle Location Size
Up or Down Quark Nucleon (Proton or Neutron) pointlike
Proton Nucleus 1015 meters
Neutron Nucleus 1015 meters
Nucleus Atom 1015 meters
Electron Atom pointlike
Atom Molecules or Objects ~ 1010 meters
Molecule Objects > 1010 meters




Table 1: Basic building blocks of normal matter as of 2011, subject to change as we discover and
understand more about the Universe, ignoring pesky things like neutrinos, photons, gluons, heavy
vector bosons, heavier leptons that physics majors (at least) will have to learn about later...
no charge.
Neutrons and protons, in turn, bond together to make an atomic nucleus. The simplest atomic
nucleus is the hydrogen nucleus, which can be as small as a single proton, or can be a proton bound
to one neutron (deuterium) or two neutrons (tritium). No matter how many protons and neutrons
are bound together, the atomic nucleus is small  order of 1015 meters in diameter. The quarks,
protons and neutrons are bound together by means of a force of nature called the strong nuclear
interaction, which is the strongest force we know of relative to the mass of the interacting particles.
The positive nucleus combines with electrons (which are negatively charged and around 2000
times lighter than a proton) to form an atom. The force responsible for this binding is the electro-
magnetic force, another force of nature (although in truth nearly all of the interaction is electrostatic
in nature, just one part of the overall electromagnetic interaction).
The light electrons repel one another electrostatically almost as strongly as they are attracted
to the nucleus that anchors them. They also obey the Pauli exclusion principle which causes them
to avoid one anothers company. These things together cause atoms to be much larger than a
nucleus, and to have interesting structure that gives rise to chemistry and molecular bonding and
(eventually) life.
Inside the nucleus (and its nucleons) there is another force that acts at very short range. This
force can cause e.g. neutrons to give off an electron and turn into a proton or other strange things
like that. This kind of event changes the atomic number of the atom in question and is usually
accompanied by nuclear radiation. We call this force the weak nuclear force. The two nuclear forces
thus both exist only at very short length scales, basically in the quantum regime inside an atomic
nucleus, where we cannot easily see them using the kinds of things well talk about this semester.
For our purposes it is enough that they exist and bind stable nuclei together so that those nuclei in
turn can form atoms, molecules, objects, us.
Our picture of normal matter, then, is that it is made up of atoms that may or may not be
bonded together into molecules, with three forces all signicantly contributing to what goes on
inside a nucleus and only one that is predominantly relevant to the electronic structure of the atoms
themselves.
There is, however, a fourth force (that we know of  there may be more still, but four is all
that weve been able to positively identify and understand). That force is gravity. Gravity is a bit
odd. It is a very long range, but very weak force  by far the weakest force of the four forces of
nature. It only is signcant when one builds planet or star sized objects, where it can do anything
from simply bind an atmosphere to a planet and cause moons and satellites to go around it in nice
orbits to bring about the catastrophic collapse of a dying star. The physical law for gravitation will

40...with the possible exception of neutrons bound together by gravity to form neutron stars. Those can be thought
of, very crudely, as very large nuclei.Week 1: newton's Laws 49
be studied over an entire week of work  later in the course. I put it down now just for completeness,
but initially well focus on the force rules in the following section.
 Gm m -
F21 = #T12 (23)
T12
Dont worry too much about what all of these symbols mean and what the value of G is  well get
to all of that but not now.
Since we live on the surface of a planet, to us gravity will be an important force, but the forces
we experience every day and we ourselves are primarily electromagnetic phenomena, with a bit of
help from quantum mechanics to give all that electromagnetic stuff just the right structure.
Lets summarize this in a short table of forces of nature, strongest to weakest:
a Strong Nuclear
b Electromagnetic
)
)
c) Weak Nuclear
)
d Gravity
Note well: It is possible that there are more forces of nature waiting to be discovered. Because
physics is not a dogma, this presents no real problem. If a new force of nature (or radically different
way to view the ones weve got) emerges as being consistent with observation and predictive, and
hence possibly/ plausibly true and correct, well simply give the discoverer a Nobel Prize, add their
name to the pantheon of great physicists, add the force itself to the list above, and move on.
Science, as noted above, is a self-correcting system of reasoning, at least when it is done right.
1 .5.2: Force Rules
The following set of force rules will be used both in this chapter and throughout this course. All of
these rules can be derived or understood (with some effort) from the forces of nature, that is to say
from elementary natural laws, but are not quite laws themselves.
a) Gravity (near the surface of the earth):
Fg = mg (24)
The direction of this force is down, so one could write this in vector form as 17.9 = mgg in
a coordinate system such that up is the +3; direction. This rule follows from newton's Law
of Gravitation, the elementary law of nature in the list above, evaluated near the surface
of the earth where it is varies only very slowly with height above the surface (and hence is
constant) as long as that height is small compared to the radius of the Earth.
The measured value of g (the gravitational constan  or gravitational eld close to the Earths
surface) thus isnt really constant  it actually varies weakly with latitude and height and the
local density of the earth immediately under your feet and is pretty complicated41 . Some
constant, eh?
Most physics books (and the wikipedia page I just linked) give gs value as something like:
g m 9.81 meters (25)
second2

41Wikipedia: http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_of_Earth. There is a very cool rotating earth graphic on
this page that shows the eld variation in a color map. This page goes into much more detail than I will about the
causes of variation of apparent gravity.50
Week 1: newton's Laws
(which is sort of an average of the variation) but in this class to the extent that we do arithmetic
with it well just use
meters
g m 10 (26)
second2
because hey, so it makes a 2% error. Thats not very big, really  you will be lucky to measure
g in your labs to within 2%, and it is so much easier to multiply or divide by 10 than 9.80665.
The Spring (Hookes Law) in one dimension:
Fw = kAa: (27)
This force is directed back to the equilibrium point (the end of the unstretched spring where
the mass is attached) in the opposite direction to Am, the displacement of the mass on the
spring away from this equilibrium position. This rule arises from the primarily electrostatic
forces holding the atoms or molecules of the spring material together, which tend to linearly
oppose small forces that pull them apart or push them together (for reasons we will understand
in some detail later).
The Normal Force:
F J_ = N (28)
This points perpendicular and away from solid surface, magnitude suicient to oppose the force
of contact whatever it might be! This is an example of a force of constraint  a force whose
magnitude is determined by the constraint that one solid object cannot generally interpenetrate
another solid object, so that the solid surfaces exert whatever force is needed to prevent it
(up to the point where the solid property itself fails). The physical basis is once again the
electrostatic molecular forces holding the solid object together, and microscopically the surface
deforms, however slightly, more or less like a spring to create the force.
Tension in an Acme (massless, unstretchable, unbreakable) string:
R=T am
This force simply transmits an attractive force between two objects on opposite ends of the
string, in the directions of the taut string at the points of contact. It is another constraint force
with no xed value. Physically, the string is like a spring once again  it microscopically is
made of bound atoms or molecules that pull ever so slightly apart when the string is stretched
until the restoring force balances the applied force.
Static Friction
hSwN (m)
(directed opposite towards net force parallel to surface to contact). This is another force of
constraint, as large as it needs to be to keep the object in question travelling at the same speed
as the surface it is in contact with, up to the maximum value static friction can exert before
the object starts to slide. This force arises from mechanical interlocking at the microscopic
level plus the electrostatic molecular forces that hold the surfaces themselves together.
Kinetic Friction
f k = MN (31)
(opposite to direction of relative sliding motion of surfaces and parallel to surface of contact).
This force does have a xed value when the right conditions (sliding) hold. This force arises
from the forming and breaking of microscopic adhesive bonds between atoms on the surfaces
plus some mechanical linkage between the small irregularities on the surfaces.Week 1: newton's Laws 51
g) Fluid Forces, Pressure: A uid in contact with a solid surface (or anything else) in general
exerts a force on that surface that is related to the pressure of the uid:
Fp = PA (32)
which you should read as the force exerted by the uid on the surface is the pressure in the
uid times the area of the surface. If the pressure varies or the surface is curved one may
have to use calculus to add up a total force. In general the direction of the force exerted is
perpendicular to the surface. An object at rest in a uid often has balanced forces due to
pressure. The force arises from the molecules in the uid literally bouncing off of the surface
of the object, transferring momentum (and exerting an average force) as they do so. We
will study this in some detail and will even derive a kinetic model for a gas that is in good
agreement with real gases.
h) Drag Forces:
Fd = bu" (33)
(directed opposite to relative velocity of motion through uid, n usually between 1 (low veloc-
ity) and 2 (high velocity). It arises in part because the surface of an object moving through
a uid is literally bouncing uid particles off in the leading direction while moving away from
particles in the trailing direction, so that there is a differential pressure on the two surfaces,
in part from kinetic friction that exerts a force component parallel to a surface in relative
motion to the uid. It is really pretty complicated  so complicated that we can only write
down a specic, computable expression for it for very simple geometries and situations. Still,
it is a very important and ubiquitous force and well try to gain some appreciation for it along
the way.
1.6: Force Balance  Static Equilibrium
Before we start using dynamics at all, let us consider what happens when all of the forces acting on
an object balance. That is, there are several non-zero (vector) forces acting on an object, but those
forces sum up to zero force. In this case, newton's First Law becomes very useful. It tells us that
the object in question will remain at rest if it is initially at rest. We call this situation where the
forces are all balanced static force equilibrium:
13,0, = :13,- = m6 = 0 (34)
i
This works both ways; if an object is at rest and stays that way, we can be certain that the forces
acting on it balance!
We will spend some time later studying static equilibrium in general once we have learned about
both forces and torques, but for the moment we will just consider a single example of what is after
all a pretty simple idea. This will also serve as a short introduction to one of the forces listed above,
Hookes Law for the force exerted by a spring on an attached mass.
Example 1.6.1: Spring and Mass in Static Force Equilibrium
Suppose we have a mass m hanging on a spring with spring constant k such that the spring is
stretched out some distance Air: from its unstretched length. This situation is pictured in gure 3.
We will learn how to really solve this as a dynamics problem later  indeed, well spend an entire
week on it! Right now we will just write down newton's laws for this problem so we can nd a. Let
the a: direction be up. Then (using Hookes Law from the list above):52 Week 1: newton's Laws

Figure 3: A mass m hangs on a spring with spring constant k. We would like to compute the amount
A1: by which the string is stretched when the mass is at rest in static force equilibrium.
SE, = k(1:  1:0)  mg = max (35)
or (with A1: = (I?  1:0, so that A1: is negative as shown)
k
w = A
a (I? g (36)
Note that this result doesnt depend on where the origin of the alt-axis is, because (I? and 1:0 both
change by the same amount as we move it around. In most cases, we will nd the equilibrium
position of a mass on a spring to be the most convenient place to put the origin, because then (I? and
A1: are the same!
In static equilibrium, aw = 0 (and hence, Fw = 0) and we can solve for Am:
aw=Amg = 0
m
EAm = g
m
Ax = E (37)
k
You will see this result appear in several problems and examples later on, so bear it in mind.
1.7: Simple Motion in One Dimension
Finally! All of that preliminary stuff is done with. If you actually read and studied the chapter up
to this point (many of you will not have done so, and youll be SORRReeee...) you should:
a) Know newton's Laws well enough to recite them on a quiz  yes, I usually just put a question
like What are newton's Laws on quizzes just to see who can recite them perfectly, a really
useful thing to be able to do given that were going to use them hundreds of times in the next
12 weeks of class, next semester, and beyond; and
b) Have at least started to commit the various force rules well use this semester to memory.Week 1: newton's Laws 53
I dont generally encourage rote memorization in this class, but for a few things, usually very
fundamental things, it can help. So if you havent done this, go spend a few minutes working on
this before starting the next section.
All done? Well all rightie then, lets see if we can actually use newton's Laws (usually newton's
Second Law, our dynamical principle) and force rules to solve problems. We will start out very gently,
trying to understand motion in one dimension (where we will not at rst need multiple coordinate
dimensions or systems or trig or much of the other stuff that will complicate life later) and then,
well, well complicate life later and try to understand what happens in 2+ dimensions.
Heres the basic structure of a physics problem. You are given a physical description of the
problem. A mass m at rest is dropped from a height H above the ground at time t = 0; what
happens to the mass as a function of time? From this description you must visualize whats going
on (sometimes but not always aided by a gure that has been drawn for you representing it in
some way). You must select a coordinate system to use to describe what happens. You must write
newton's Second Law in the coordinate system for all masses, being sure to include all forces or force
rules that contribute to its motion. You must solve newton's Second Law to nd the accelerations
of all the masses (equations called the equations of motion of the system). You must solve the
equations of motion to nd the trajectories of the masses, their positions as a function of time, as
well as their velocities as a function of time if desired. Finally, armed with these trajectories, you
must answer all the questions the problem poses using algebra and reason and  rarely in this class
 arithmetic!
Simple enough.
Lets put this simple solution methodology to the test by solving the following one dimensional,
single mass example problem, and then see what weve learned.
Example 1.7.1: A Mass Falling from Height H
Lets solve the problem we posed above, and as we do so develop a solution rubric  a recipe for
solving all problems involving dynamics./ The problem, recall, was to drop a mass m from rest
from a height H, algebraically nd the trajectory (the position function that solves the equations
of motion) and velocity (the time derivative of the trajectory), and then answer any questions that
might be asked using a mix of algebra, intuition, experience and common sense. For this
rst problem well postpone actually asking any question until we have these solutions so that we
can see what kinds of questions one might reasonably ask and be able to answer.
The rst step in solving this or any physics problem is to visualize whats going on./ Mass m?
Height H? Drop? Start at rest? Fall? All of these things are input data that mean something when
translated into algebraic physicsese, the language of physics, but in the end we have to coordinatize
the problem (choose a coordinate system in which to do the algebra and solve our equations for an
answer) and to choose a good one we need to draw a representation of the problem.
Physics problems that you work and hand in that have no gure, no picture, not even additional
hand-drawn decorations on a prouided gure will rather soon lose points in the grading scheme!
At rst we (the course faculty) might just remind you and not take points off, but by your second
assignment youd better be adding some relevant artwork to every solution. Figure 4 is what an

42At least for the next couple of weeks... but seriously, this rubric is useful all the way up to graduate physics.
43This has two benets  one is that it actually is a critical step in solving the problem, the other is that drawing
engages the right hemisphere of your brain (the left hemisphere is the one that does the algebra). The right hemisphere
is the one that controls formation of long term memory, and it can literally get bored, independently of the left
hemisphere and interrupt your ability to work. If youve ever worked for a very long time on writing something
very dry (left hemisphere) or doing lots of algebraic problems (left hemisphere) and found your eyes being almost
irresistably drawn up to look out the window at the grass and trees and ponies and bright sun, then know that it is
your right brain that has taken over your body because it is dying in there, bored out of its (your!) gourd.54 Week 1: newton's Laws

Figure 4: A picture of a ball being dropped from a height H, with a suitable one-dimensional
coordinate system added. Note that the gure clearly indicates that it is the force of gravity that
makes it fall. The pictures of Satchmo (my border collie) and the tree and sun and birds arent
strictly necessary and might even be distracting, but my right brain was bored when I drew this
picture and they do orient the drawing and make it more fun!
actual gure you might draw to accompany a problem might look like.
Note a couple of things about this gure. First of all, it is large  it took up 1/4+ of the
unlined/white page I drew it on. This is actually good practice  do not draw postage-stamp sized
gures! Draw them large enough that you can decorate them, not with Satchmo but with things like
coordinates, forces, components of forces, initial data reminders. This is your brain were talking
about here, because the paper is functioning as an extension of your brain when you use it to help
solve the problem. Is your brain postage-stamp sized? Dont worry about wasting paper  paper is
cheap, physics educations are expensive. Use a whole page (or more) per problem solution at this
point, not three problems per page with gures that require a magnifying glass to make out.
When I (or your instructor) solve problems with you, this is the kind of thing youll see us draw,
over and over again, on the board, on paper at a table, wherever. In time, physicists become pretty
good schematic artists and so should you. However, in a textbook we want things to be clearer and
prettier, so Ill redraw this in gure 5, this time with a computer drawing tool (xg) that Ill use
for drawing most of the gures included in the textbook. Alas, it wont have Satchmo, but it does
have all of the important stu that should be on your hand-drawn gures.
Note that I drew two alternative ways of adding coordinates to the problem. The one on the
left is appropriate if you visualize the problem from the ground, looking up like Satchmo, where
the ground is at zero height. This might be e.g. dropping a ball off of the top of Duke Chapel, for
example, with you on the ground watching it fall.
The one or the right works if you visualize the problem as something like dropping the same ball

To keep the right brain happy while you do left brained stuff, give it something to do  listen to music, draw pictures
or visualize a lot, take ve minute right-brainbreaks and deliberately look at something visually pleasing. If your
right brain is happy, you can work longer and better. If your right brain is engaged in solving the problem you will
remember what you are working on much better, it will make more sense, and your attention wont wander as much.
Physics is a whole brain subject, and the more pathways you use while working on it, the easier it is to understand
and remember!Week 1: newton's Laws 55


V=0@t=0 V=0@t=0
+ +y
H m m
x
mg mg
H
:I; "7:!
Figure 5: The same gure and coordinate system, drawn perfectly with Xg, plus a second (alter-
native) coordinatization.
into a well, where the ground is still at zero height but now it falls down to a negative height H
from zero instead of starting at H and falling to height zero. Or, you dropping the ball from the
top of the Duke Chapel and counting y = 0 as the height where you are up there (and the initial
position in y of the ball), with the ground at y = H below the nal position of the ball after it
falls.
Now pay attention, because this is important: Physics doesnt care which coordinate sys-
tem you use! Both of these coordinatizations of the problem are inertial reference frames. If you
think about it, you will be able to see how to transform the answers obtained in one coordinate
system into the corresponding answers in the other (basically subtract a constant H from the values
of y in the left hand gure and you get y in the right hand gure, right?). newton's Laws will
work perfectly in either inertial reference frame, and truthfully there are an innite number of
coordinate frames you could choose that would all describe the same problem in the end. You can
therefore choose the frame that makes the problem easiest to solve!
Personally, from experience I prefer the left hand frame  it makes the algebra a tiny bit prettier
 but the one on the right is really almost as good. I reject without thinking about it all of the frames
where the mass m e.g. starts at the initial position yi = H / 2 and falls down to the nal position
yf = H/2. I do sometimes consider a frame like the one on the right with y positive pointing
down, but it often bothers students to have down be positive (even though it is very natural to
orient our coordinates so that 17'" points in the positive direction of one of them) so well work into
that gently. Finally, I did draw the a: (horizontal) coordinate and ignored altogether for now the
z coordinate that in principle is pointing out of the page in a right-handed coordinate frame. We
dont really need either of these because no aspect of the motion will change a: or 2 (there are no
forces acting in those directions) so that the problem is effectively one-dimensional.
Next, we have to put in the physics, which at this point means: Draw in all of the forces
that act on the mass as proportionate vector arrows in the direction of the force. The
proportionate part will be diicult at rst until you get a feeling for how large the forces are likely
to be relative to one another but in this case there is only one force, gravity that acts, so we can
write on our page (and on our diagram) the vector relation:
F = mg!2 (38)
or if you prefer, you can write the dimension-labelled scalar equation for the magnitude of the force
in the y-direction:
Fv = mg (39)

44For the moment you can take my word for this, but we will prove it in the next week/ chapter when we learn how
to systematically change between coordinate frames!56 Week 1: newton's Laws
Note well! Either of these is acceptable vector notation because the force is a vector (magnitude
and direction). So is the decoration on the gure  an arrow for direction labelled mg.
What is not quite right (to the tune of minus a point or two at the discretion of the grader) is to
just write F = mg on your paper without indicating its direction somehow. Yes, this is the magnitude
of the force, but in what direction does it point in the particular coordinate system you drew into
your gure? After all, you could have made +1: point down as easily as y! Practice connecting
your visualization of the problem in the coordinates you selected to a correct algebraic/ symbolic
description of the vectors involved.
In context, we dont really need to write Fw = Fz = 0 because they are so clearly irrelevant.
However, in many other problems we will need to include either or both of these. Youll quickly get
a feel for when you do or dont need to worry about them.
Now comes the key step  setting up all of the algebra that leads to the solution. We write
newton's Second Law for the mass m, and algebraically solve for the acceleration! Since there is
only one relevant component of the force in this one-dimensional problem, we only need to do this
one time for the scalar equation for that component.:
Fy = mg = may
may = mg
ay =  g
d2y dvy
_ = _ = _ 40
01252 dt 9 ( )
where g = 10 m/second2 is the constant (within 2%, close to the Earths surface, remember).
We are all but done at this point. The last line (the algebraic expression for the acceleration)
is called the equation of motion for the system, and one of our chores will be to learn how to solve
several common kinds of equation of motion. This one is a constant acceleration problem. Lets
do it.
Here is the algebra involved. Learn it. Practice doing this until it is second nature when solving
simple problems like this. I do not recommend memorizing the solution you obtain at the end, even
though when you have solved the problem enough times you will probably remember it anyway for
the rest of your share of eternity. Start with the equation of motion for a constant acceleration:
d
% = g Next, multiply both sides by dt to get:
dvy = g dt Then integrate both sides:
/ dvy =  / g dt doing the indenite integrals to get:
vy(t) = gt + C (41)
The nal 0 is the constant of integration of the indenite integrals. We have to evaluate it using
the given (usually initial) conditions. In this case we know that:
vy(0)=g-0+C=C=O (42)
(Recall that we even drew this into our gure to help remind us  it is the bit about being dropped
from rest at time t = 0.) Thus:
vim = gt (43)
We now know the velocity of the dropped ball as a function of time! This is good, we are likely
to need it. However, the solution to the dynamical problem is the trajectory function, y(t). To ndWeek 1: newton's Laws 57
it, we repeat the same process, but now use the denition for 12,, in terms of y:
% = vy(t) = gt Multiply both sides by dt to get:
=  gt dt Next, integrate both sides:
y
/dy = /gt dt to get:
1
= gt2 + D (44)
The nal D is again the constant of integration of the indenite integrals. We again have to evaluate
it using the given (initial) conditions in the problem. In this case we know that:
1
y(0)=g-02+D=D=H (45)
because we dropped it from an initial height y(0) = H. Thus:
1
y(t) = 392:2 + H (46)
and we know everything there is to know about the motion! We know in particular exactly where it
is at all times (until it hits the ground) as well as how fast it is going and in what direction. Sure,
later well learn how to evaluate other quantities that depend on these two, but with the solutions
in hand evaluating those quantities will be (we hope) trivial.
Finally, we have to answer any questions that the problem might ask! Note well that
the problem may not have told you to evaluate y(t) and vy(t), but in many cases youll need them
anyway to answer the questions they do ask. Here are a couple of common questions you can now
answer using the solutions you just obtained:
a) How long will it take for the ball to reach the ground?
b) How fast is it going when it reaches the ground?
To answer the rst one, we use a bit of algebra. The ground is (recall) y = 0 and it will reach
there at some specic time (the time we want to solve for) tg. We write the condition that it is at
the ground at time tg:
1
gay) = 392:; + H = o (47)
If we rearrange this and solve for tg we get:
t9 = j: E (48)
g
Hmmm, there seem to be two times at which y(tg) equals zero, one in the past and one in the
future. The right answer, of course, must be the one in the future: t9 = +x/2H/ , but you should
think about what the one in the past means, and how the algebraic solution weve just developed is
ignorant of things like your hand holding the ball before t = 0 and just what value of y corresponds
to the ground
That was pretty easy. To nd the speed at which it hits the ground, one can just take our correct
(future) time and plug it into 12y! That is:
119 =vy(t gg)=-gt =19? 29H (49)
Note well that it is going down (in the negative y direction) when it hits the ground. This 1s a good
hint for the previous puzzle. What direction would it have been going at the negative time? What58 Week 1: newton's Laws
kind of motion does the overall solution describe, on the interval from t = (00, 00)? Do we need
to use a certain amount of common sense to avoid using the algebraic solution for times or values
of y for which they make no sense, such as y < 0 or t < 0 (in the ground or before we let go of the
ball, respectively)?
The last thing we might look at Im going to let you do on your own (dont worry, its easy
enough to do in your head). Assuming that this algebraic solution is valid for any reasonable H,
how fast does the ball hit the ground after falling (say) 5 meters? How about 20 = 4 * 5 meters?
How about 80 = 16 * 5 meters? How long does it take for the ball to fall 5 meters, 20 meters, 80
meters, etc? In this course we wont do a lot of arithmetic, but whenever we learn a new idea with
parameters like g in it, it is useful to do a little arithmetical exploration to see what a reasonable
answer looks like. Especially note how the answers scale with the height  if one drops it from 4x
the height, how much does that increase the time it falls and speed with which it hits?
One of these heights causes it to hit the ground in one second, and all of the other answers scale
with it like the square root. If you happen to remember this height, you can actually estimate how
long it takes for a ball to fall almost any height in your head with a division and a square root, and
if you multiply the time answer by ten, well, there is the speed with which it hits! Well do some
conceptual problems that help you understand this scaling idea for homework.
This (a falling object) is nearly a perfect problem archetype or example for one dimensional
motion. Sure, we can make it more complicated, but usually well do that by having more than one
thing move in one dimension and then have to gure out how to solve the two problems simultaneously
and answer questions given the results.
Lets take a short break to formally solve the equation of motion we get for a constant force in
one dimension, as the general solution exhibits two constants of integration that we need to be able
to identify and evaluate from initial conditions. Note well that the next problem is almost identical
to the former one. It just differs in that you are given the force 17" itself, not a knowledge that the
force is e.g. gravity.
Example 1.7.2: A Constant Force in One Dimension
This time well imagine a different problem. A car of mass m is travelling at a constant speed 120 as
it enters a long, nearly straight merge lane. A distance d from the entrance, the driver presses the
accelerator and the engine exerts a constant force of magnitude F on the car.
a) How long does it take the car to reach a nal velocity Uf > 120?
b) How far (from the entrance) does it travel in that time?
As before, we need to start with a good picture of what is going on. Hence a car:
y
H
O
er
||
er
H,


m V0 - F -


Figure 6: One possible way to portray the motion of the car and coordinatize it.Week 1: newton's Laws 59
In gure 6 we see what we can imagine are three slices of the cars position as a function of
time at the moments described in the problem. On the far left we see it entering a long, nearly
straight merge lane. The second position corresponds to the time the car is a distance d from the
entrance, which is also the time the car starts to accelerate because of the force F. I chose to start
the clock then, so that I can integrate to nd the position as a function of time while the force is
being applied. The nal position corresponds to when the car has had the force applied for a time
t f and has acquired a velocity 11f. I labelled the distance of the car from the entrance D at that
time. The mass of the car is indicated as well.
This gure completely captures the important features of the problem! Well, almost. There are
two forces I ignored altogether. One of them is gravity, which is pulling the car down. The other is
the so-called normal force exerted by the road on the car  this force pushes the car up. I ignored
them because my experience and common sense tell me that under ordinary circumstances the road
doesnt push on the car so that it jumps into the air, nor does gravity pull the car down into the road
 the two forces will balance and the car will not move or accelerate in the vertical direction. Next
week well take these forces into explicit account too, but here Im just going to use my intuition
that they will cancel and hence that the ydirection can be ignored, all of the motion is going to be
in the alt-direction as Ive dened it with my coordinate axes.
Its time to follow our ritual. We will write newton's Second Law and solve for the acceleration
(obtaining an equation of motion). Then we will integrate twice to nd rst 12w (t) and then a:(t). We
will have to be extra careful with the constants of integration this time, and in fact will get a very
general solution, one that can be applied to all constant acceleration problems, although I do not
recommend that you memorize this solution and try to use it every time you see newton's Second
Law! For one thing, well have quite a few problems this year where the force, and acceleration, are
not constant and in those problems the solution we will derive is wrong. Alas, to my own extensive
and direct experience, students that memorize kinematic solutions to the constant acceleration
problem instead of learning to solve it with actual integration done every time almost invariably
try applying the solution to e.g. the harmonic oscillator problem later, and I hate that. So dont
memorize the answer; learn how to derive it and practice the derivation until (sure) you know the
result, and also know when you can use it.
Thus:
F = maw
F
aw =  =a0 (a constant)
m
de
_ = 50
dt 0 (
Next, multiply through by dt and integrate both sides:
F
vw(t)=/de=/aodt=aot+V=Rt+V (51)
Either of the last two are valid answers, provided that we dene a0 = F/ m somewhere in the solution
and also provided that the problem doesnt explicitly ask for an answer to be given in terms of F
and m. V is a constant of integration that we will evaluate below.
Note that if a0 = F/m was not a constant (say that F(t) is a function of time) then we would
have to do the integral:
vw(t) = / % dt= % / F(t) dt =??? (52)
At the very least, we would have to know the explicit functional form of F(t) to proceed, and the
answer would not be linear in time.60 Week 1: newton's Laws
At time t = 0, the velocity of the car in the alt-direction is uo, so (check for yourself) V = 120 and:
uw(t) = aot + 120 = (11:- (53)
We multiply this equation by dt on both sides, integrate, and get:
1 2
$05) = dill = (dot + 00) dt = 50,075 + Uot + (170 (54)
where 1:0 is the constant of integration. We note that at time t = 0, a:(0) = d, so 1:0 = d. Thus:
1
a:(t) = 5a0t2 + uot + d (55)
It is worth collecting the two basic solutions in one place. It should be obvious that for any
one-dimensional (say, in the m-direction) constant acceleration aw = a0 problem we will always nd
that:
01,.(75) = aot + 00 (56)
1
a:(t) = 5a0t2 + uot + 1:0 (57)
where 1:0 is the m-position at time t = 0 and 120 is the alt-velocity at time t = 0. You can see why it
is so very tempting to just memorize this result and pretend that you know a piece of physics, but
dont!
The algebra that led to this answer is basically ordinary math with units. As weve seen, math
with units has a special name all its own  kinematics  and the pair of equations 56 and 57 are
called the kinematic solutions to the constant acceleration problem. Kinematics should be contrasted
with dynamics, the physics of forces and laws of nature that lead us to equations of motion. One
way of viewing our solution strategy is that  after drawing and decorating our gure, of course
we solve rst the dynamics problem of writing our dynamical principle (newton's Second Law with
the appropriate vector total force), turning it into a differential equation of motion, then solving
the resulting kinematics problem represented by the equation of motion with calculus. Dont be
tempted to skip the calculus and try to memorize the kinematic solutions  it is just as important
to understand and be able to do the kinematic calculus quickly and painlessly as it is to be able to
set up the dynamical part of the solution.
Now, of course, we have to actually answer the questions given above. To do this requires as
before logic, common sense, intuition, experience, and math. First, at what time tf does the car
have speed Uf? When:
uw(tf) = Uf = aotf + 120 (58)
of course. You can easily solve this for t f. Note that I just transformed the English statement At
t f, the car must have speed 12f into an algebraic equation that means the exact same thing!
Second, what is D? Well in English, the distance D from the entrance is where the car is at time
t f, when it is also travelling at speed Uf. If we turn this sentence into an equation we get:
1
2:05,) = D = gaunt; + uotf + d (59)
Again, having solved the previous equation algebraically, you can substitute the result for t f into
this equation and get D in terms of the originally given quantities! The problem is solved, the
questions are answered, were nished.
Or rather, you will be nished, after you ll in these last couple of steps on your own!
